The Development of LIGO
Introduction
First proposed in 1915, Einstein's theory of general relativity resulted in a number of predicted physical consequences including the curvature of light and the existence of black holes (Tillman, Bartels & Dutfield, 2022). One such prediction was the existence of gravitational waves - ripples in space-time that stretch and contract space as they propagate (Rothman, 2018). LIGO, or Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory is an observatory constructed to detect such gravitational waves emanating from large celestial bodies. By utilising laser interferometry, LIGO has not only been able to detect gravitational waves, but has additionally been able to identify their source, whether from the collision of two black holes or the mutual orbit of two neutron stars (Rothman, 2018). The achievement of such a feat was only possible through constant technological innovation. In this report, the science behind gravitational waves and laser interferometry will be explored, while analysing LIGO’s connection to the SHE strand of development.

Science - Gravitational waves
According to Einstein's theory of general relativity, mass and energy are able to curve space-time. Gravity can therefore be thought of as the curvature of space-time rather than a force as described in Newtonian Physics (LIGO Caltech, 2019). This can be demonstrated through the analogy of heavy objects being placed on a tarp as the consequent depression causes other objects to attract as demonstrated in Figure 1. Additionally, Einstein's theory of general relativity states that gravity is not instantaneous but instead propagates as radiation at the speed of light. Extending the analogy of a tarp, this mirrors the speed at which energy is transferred through the surface rather than instantaneously creating a depression (Steve Mould, 2016). This results in accelerating objects creating ripples in space-time in the form of gravitational waves that stretch and compress space as shown in Figure 2. However, as the waves created by most objects are too small to detect, only massive bodies travelling at high speeds - such as binary neutron stars - create waves that are feasibly detectable. Even then, these waves stretch and compress the 4 kilometre arms of LIGO by a length of one thousandth the diameter of a proton as the amplitude of gravitational waves are inversely proportional to the distance travelled (LIGO Caltech, 2019). As gravitational waves do not strongly interact with matter, unlike electromagnetic radiation, this has allowed for clearer observations of far away neutron stars and black holes (Sormani, 2017).
 
Figure 1 - heavy metal ball and lighter metal ball placed on a sheet of rubber
 
Figure 2 - linearized simplification of gravitational waves travelling across a plane

Science - Light Interferometry
As the acronym suggests, LIGO detects the distortion of space-time from gravitational waves through laser interferometry. A laser is shot at a mirror, splitting the beam of light into two separate beams that traverse perpendicular channels as shown in Figure 3. The lengths of the two channels are set so that when the two beams of light reflect and recombine, they have a phase difference of 180 degrees or half a wavelength. According to the principle of superposition, the phenomenon of interference (where two or more waves intersect) creates a resultant wave that is an algebraic sum of the combined initial waves (University of Connecticut, 2019). Therefore, as demonstrated by the central diagram in Figure 4, the light waves from LIGO cause complete destructive interference resulting in no light as the trough of one wave aligns with the peak of the other. However, the distortion of space-time caused by gravitational waves stretches the length of one channel while compressing the length of the other before stretching and compressing in the opposite direction as further demonstrated by Figure 4. This periodically misaligns the two light beams and creates partially constructive interference, allowing for the detection of light (LIGO Caltech, 2019). 
 
Figure 3 - diagram of LIGO 
Figure 4 - LIGO through stages of compression and contraction with diagram of the resulting interference from the laser

A large concern in the detection of gravitational waves is the noise caused by quantum mechanics. The cause of this noise is the variance in amplitude (Da) and phase (D) of both light and gravitational radiation as demonstrated in Figure 5. This variance occurs due to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle that states there is a limit to how precisely certain pairs of physical properties can be measured. Mathematically, the limit of the two properties can be represented as DaD>1 where the product of both uncertainties must be greater than one (MIT Kavli Institute, 2018). The variance in the phase creates shot noise, where the differing phases cause partial constructive interference even without the presence of gravitational waves. As high-frequency waves have short wavelengths, the effects of a varying phase are much more prominent in the detection of high-frequency gravitational waves (LIGO Caltech, 2019). Comparatively, a large variance in amplitude results in radiation pressure noise. This is due to the wave-particle duality of light, where light radiation with a large amplitude can be interpreted as an increase in photons being emitted. This increases the effects of radiation pressure as the photons transfer some of their momentum to the hanging mirrors by colliding with matter particles (Miller, 2024). This causes the mirrors to oscillate and vary the distance that light travels. As the mirrors oscillate at a low-frequency, this noise largely affects the detection of low-frequency gravitational waves.
 
Figure 5 - variance in phase vs variance in amplitude

Development
The development of LIGO started with the theorization of gravitational waves, first proposed as the gravitational equivalent of electromagnetic waves by Oliver Heaviside in 1893 (Caltech, n.d.). However, the first theoretical proof of gravitational waves came from Einstein’s theory of general relativity in 1916, where he demonstrated that gravitational waves were a solution to linearized general relativity. However, as there was no solution for gravitational waves in the nonlinear framework, Einstein doubted their existence, preventing the development of technology to detect such phenomena (Sormani, 2017). After his death, through the work of a number of physicists, a solution to gravitational waves was found within Einstein’s gravitational field equations. This gave the ‘green light’ for experimental physicists to start designing detection methods in the hopes of further testing the validity of the theory of general relativity. A key requirement for the completion of LIGO was the development of lasers, which coincidentally arose from the foundational theory of stimulated emission described by Einstein in 1917 (American Physics Society, 2024). Prototypes for lasers were made during the 1950s and 1960s, around the same time physicists were attempting to design a way to detect gravitational waves. Physicists therefore realised laser interferometry’s potential to measure relativistic distances, leading to the first proposed laser interferometer in 1962. 

Due to the extreme precision needed to record gravitational waves, any noise in the data drastically reduces the readability. Therefore, the development of noise reduction is a high priority for LIGO. One of the most important developments in laser interferometry was computational analysis of frequency data (CPLB, 2020). LIGO utilises dual detectors located in different areas of America with a distance of 3002 kilometres as shown in Figure 6. Through the use of computers, the datasets from both facilities can be compared and combined, allowing for the exclusion of local vibrations in the earth caused by vehicles and tectonic movement while keeping any commonalities between the data. Additionally, the fastest that a gravitational wave can propagate from one facility to the other is about 10 milliseconds. This means that any supposed commonalities that have a time interval larger than 10 milliseconds can automatically be discounted and removed from the data by certain algorithms, isolating the signal created by gravitational waves (Caltech, n.d.). Without the development of computational analysis, many external factors cannot be accounted for, greatly increasing the difficulty of detecting gravitational waves. 
Figure 6 - the two LIGO facilities

After constant improvements in external noise reduction and equipment stability, LIGO reached a point where the sensitivity of the machinery was limited by the variance in amplitude and phase of waves caused by Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle. The largest issue was the variance in phase which caused shot noise, as LIGO measures the interference caused by the unalignment of phases. Therefore, LIGO utilised phase quantum squeezing in 2019, where by manipulating the vacuum space that light passes through, the electromagnetic radiation would enter a squeezed coherent state (caltech, 2023). In this state, the variance in the light’s phase is greatly reduced while the uncertainty in amplitude increases to maintain DaD>1. However, this consequently causes an increase in radiation pressure noise, greatly impacting the detection of low-frequency gravitational waves as demonstrated by the green data in Figure 7 (Miller, 2024). The solution to this was the development of frequency-dependent squeezing where the detection of high-frequency gravitational waves would cause the light to be phase-squeezed while the detection of low-frequency gravitational waves would cause the light to be amplitude-squeezed. It was found that a phase-squeezed vacuum could be transformed into an amplitude-squeezed vacuum simply through delaying it by a quarter of a wave cycle (Miller, 2024). Therefore, a chamber that does not affect high-frequency components but allow “low-frequency components of the squeezed vacuum to enter… and ricochet around for a while before exiting” was developed; allowing for frequency-dependent quantum squeezing to be achieved. As demonstrated by the purple data in Figure 7, this maintained the reduced noise in the detection of high-frequency gravitational waves without increasing the noise in low-frequency gravitational waves.

 
Figure 7 - Comparison of noise from no squeezing (black), frequency-independent phase squeezing (green) and frequency dependent squeezing (purple)

Conclusion
In conclusion, LIGO represents a monumental feat in human innovation. First created to further test Einstein’s theory of general relativity, the facility has proven the existence of gravitational waves while also detecting celestial bodies too far for electromagnetic telescopes to detect. Through the development of computational analysis, physicists have been able to compare the data recorded from the dual LIGO facilities and reduce external noise factors, while developments in the field of quantum optics have allowed for the implementation of the first ever frequency dependent quantum squeezing. LIGO therefore represents 100 years of human innovation, from the proposal of gravitational relativity and the laser, all the way to manipulating light at a quantum level. 

Reference list
American Physics Society (2024). December 1958: Invention of the Laser. [online] Aps.org. Available at: https://www.aps.org/archives/publications/apsnews/200312/history.cfm.
Caltech (n.d.). A Brief History of LIGO. [online] Available at: https://www.ligo.caltech.edu/system/media_files/binaries/313/original/LIGOHistory.pdf.
Caltech (n.d.). LIGO R&D. [online] LIGO Lab | Caltech. Available at: https://www.ligo.caltech.edu/page/research-development.
caltech (2023). How Squeezing Light Reduces Uncertainty in LIGO’s Measurements. [online] YouTube. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q5lnamXhnfI [Accessed 16 Aug. 2024].
CPLB (2020). An introduction to LIGO–Virgo data analysis. [online] Christopher Berry. Available at: https://cplberry.com/2020/02/09/gw-data-guides/.
LIGO Caltech (2019). What are Gravitational Waves? [online] LIGO Lab | Caltech. Available at: https://www.ligo.caltech.edu/page/what-are-gw.
Miller, J.L. (2024). Frequency-dependent squeezing makes LIGO even more sensitive. Physics Today, [online] 77(1), pp.13–16. doi:https://doi.org/10.1063/pt.3.5374.
MIT Kavli Institute (2018). Quantum Measurements | MIT Kavli Institute. [online] MIT Kavli Institute | Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research. Available at: https://space.mit.edu/instrumentation/quantum-measurements/ [Accessed 16 Aug. 2024].
Rothman, T. (2018). The Secret History of Gravitational Waves. [online] American Scientist. Available at: https://www.americanscientist.org/article/the-secret-history-of-gravitational-waves.
Sormani, C. (2017). A Two-Part Feature: The Mathematics of Gravitational Waves. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 64(07), pp.684–685. doi:https://doi.org/10.1090/noti1551.
Steve Mould (2016). Gravitational Waves Work Like This Drill on Spandex. [online] YouTube. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dw7U3BYMs4U [Accessed 16 Aug. 2024].
Tillman, N.T., Bartels, M. and Dutfield, S. (2022). Einstein’s theory of general relativity. [online] Space.com. Available at: https://www.space.com/17661-theory-general-relativity.html.
University of Connecticut (2019). Constructive and Destructive Interference. [online] Uconn.edu. Available at: https://www.phys.uconn.edu/~gibson/Notes/Section5_2/Sec5_2.htm.
Veritasium (2017). The Absurdity of Detecting Gravitational Waves. YouTube. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iphcyNWFD10.


 
Abstract
Ken Kesey’s 1962 One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest follows Randle McMurphy, a brash gambler who brings hope into an oppressed ward. Written during a time of social unrest, the text conveys the central theme of overcoming institutional power through the uprising of the oppressed patients against Nurse Ratched. Additionally, Kesey uses storytelling tropes and archetypes to create a fulfilling narrative. The text can therefore be analysed from the archetypal perspective to gain insight into the character arc of Randle McMurphy and a Marxist perspective to create a deeper understanding of the social commentary within the book. 

Archetypal
By analysing One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest through Frye’s archetypal lens, it can be observed that Kesey uses the tragic genre as well as the archetype of the tragic hero to nurture sympathy towards McMurphy amongst the audience. Through Frye’s lens, the text is categorised as a tragedy, where McMurphy - the tragic hero - goes through a series of struggles before eventually meeting his end. This is emphasised by the “big control panel” (Kesey, p.123) that McMurphy fails to lift off the ground, symbolising the impossible challenge of facing the institute – an effort conveyed by a patient to be “[as] foolhardy as [his] bet about the nurse” (Kesey, p.124). This draws the audience to sympathise with McMurphy’s seemingly impossible goal to overcome the oppressive power of Nurse Ratched. Furthermore, Kesey plays into existing archetypal characteristics to further the audience's perception of McMurphy as the tragic hero. The fatal flaw is a key part of what differentiates a tragic hero from the classical ‘perfect’ hero. From Frye’s perspective, McMurphy’s tragic flaw is anger, as his initial reaction to the obnoxiously loud music of the ward is to “tell that coon over there to turn it off or get his fat little ass kicked” (Kesey, p.80). While McMurphy is able to regulate this flaw by treating Nurse Ratched’s rule as a challenge or a “pressure game” (Kesey, p.80) his anger finally causes his downfall when at the end he “smashed through that glass door... And ripped [Nurse Ratched’s] uniform all the way down the front” (Kesey, p.318). This outburst of anger conveys McMurphy’s imperfections to the audience where he could have “take[n] what he’d already won and let her have the last round” (Kesey, p.318), but strengthen their view of his heroism as “it was [the patients] that had been… keeping him standing long after his feet and legs had given out” (Kesey, p.318). Therefore, by utilising the tragic hero archetype, Kesey paints McMurphy as a man who falls to his anger out of wanting to defend the patients.

Furthermore, from Frye’s archetypal lens, Kesey challenges the conventional modes of literature through the depiction of McMurphy’s rebellion against ‘the ward’s’ institutional power. As a tragic hero, Frye views McMurphy as part of the high mimetic mode where his ‘nobleness’ puts him above a regular human though not above the environmental challenges of the ward. Juxtaposed to McMurphy’s confidence however, the patients act inferior and are disempowered by Nurse Ratched, making them a part of the ironic mode. McMurphy and Billy’s argument about whether they are metaphorical ‘wolves’ or ‘rabbits’ represent the contrasting positions of the two within the story, where the ‘wolf’ is high-mimetic while the ‘rabbit’ is ironic. This allows the reader to draw from their understanding of narrative archetypes and create an initial idea of who McMurphy and the patients are. However, Kesey breaks this initial assumption by directly challenging the framework of literary modes with McMurphy asserting there is no such distinction and exclaiming “Goddammit, I’m no wolf and you’re no rabbit” (Kesey, p.67). This causes the audience to alter their perception of the characters from being flat archetypes in the way Nurse Ratched views the patients, to full human beings. Therefore, from Frye’s perspective McMurphy challenges the notion of predetermined characteristics as a way of further revolting against the ward that acts “like a cartoon world, where the figures are flat and out-lined in black” (Kesey, p.33). This not only inspires the audience to overcome restrictions they might find themselves in, but also conveys the central message of how the real world has been imposed with rigid structure where one is destined to be better or worse than their surroundings. Kesey argues this structure has been put in place through the control of institutions in the real world that mirror the obsessive control of Nurse Ratched. 

Marxist
Throughout One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, Kesey depicts a class structure in which the medical staff are superior to the patients; portrayed through the motif of machinery. By analysing the text with a Marxist perspective, Nurse Ratched and the medical staff are seen as bourgeoisie while the patients are the proletariats. This is demonstrated through the mechanical imagery of the chronics being described as “machines with flaws inside that can’t be repaired”(Kesey, p.16) as well as the motion of Nurse Ratched triggering “some acoustic device in the walls” (Kesey, p.51) to control the patients. The mechanical imagery allows the audience to see how the patients become objectified and controlled, conveying the oppressive nature of the institute as the patients lose their autonomy and become robots. /// From the Marxist perspective, Nurse Ratched represents capitalist ideals as she envisions “a world of precision efficiency and tidiness” (Kesey, p.29). Her attempts to maximise the efficiency of the ward reflects a business’s mechanical pursuit of optimal productivity without consideration for the wellbeing of its workers, allowing readers to personify capitalism to better understand its apathetic cruelty as an economic system. However, when reading the text from a Marxist lens, the ward is not a complete evil as it acts as a socialist society in which the patients are ‘provided’ for. It is only through the dictator-like control of the corrupt Nurse Ratched that the ward becomes oppressive. This is demonstrated during Nurse Ratched’s break as when the ward is run by the “little Jap nurse from Disturbed” (Kesey, p.319), huge changes are made to benefit the patients. Kesey consequently demonstrates how corrupt individuals create a class divide between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, in a supposedly ‘equal’ society.

Having established the corrupt and classist society within the ward, Kesey depicts McMurphy’s revolution to undermine Nurse Ratchedd’s power. From the Marxist perspective, McMurphy starts to embody communist ideals as he revolts, moving away from his “capitalistic talent” (Kesey, p.266). These ideals are first demonstrated when he argues with the patients, asking “Don’t you see you can’t let her take over completely?” (Kesey, p.70), in an attempt to turn the proletariat patients against the bourgeoisie medical staff. However, it is only after Bromden expresses his contempt for McMurphy always “winning things…” (Kesey, p.269) when the patients’ “thought it wasn’t to be winning things . . .” (Kesey, p.270) that McMurphy realises he must work for the benefit of all patients, rather than only self-gain. This development in character for McMurphy allows the audience to see how by exemplifying Communist ideals, McMurphy is able to better rally the patients and create more support for the overthrowing of the bourgeoisie. Moreover, from a Marxist perspective, Kesey conveys how the confidence of a single man can spread to unite a whole group of proletariats, as Harding states, “no more rabbits, Mack” (Kesey, p.307) in reference to the fact that the men have overcome their fear of Nurse Ratched. This allows the audience to realise the power that an individual can have in spreading communist ideology, which in turn creates a coalition of people fighting against an oppressive class system. 

Word Count - 1234

